# Pokémon Emerald

This is a fork of a decompilation of Pokémon Emerald.


## PRET Info

To set up the repository, see [INSTALL.md](INSTALL.md) (modified per this fork).

For contacts and other pret projects, see [pret.github.io](https://pret.github.io/).


## This fork

This fork uses a custom compiler plug-in to generate code that can pack Emerald's save files in a format which is optimized for space. This format is generated at build time based on what data is actually being saved; as you add or remove things in the savedata definitions (i.e. `SaveBlock1`, `SaveBlock2`, `PokemonStorage`), the compiler plug-in will automatically update the savedata format. The compiler plug-in is designed for modern versions of GCC, so this branch requires `MODERN` builds.

There is a `SAVEDATA_SERIALIZATION_VERSION` macro which uniquely identifies save file format versions ("serialization versions"). You should only increase the value of this macro whenever you make a change that affects the contents of the save file. This value is written into the player's savegame and can be auto-detected by external tools.

A web-based save editor is included, with the ability to load, display, and edit save files, as well as the ability to upgrade a save file from one serialization version to another: players can start a playthrough with one version of your hack, and then use the save editor to upgrade their file for use with a later version of your hack. Post-build scripts are used to copy data out of the game's source code and into resource files for use by the save editor, so that things like Pokemon species names and item names don't have to be hardcoded into the save editor. The custom compiler plug-in generates an XML file which describes the savedata format it has generated; the post-build scripts maintain versioned copies of this XML file for use by the save editor, allowing it to know what formats exist and how to convert between them. Every change to `SAVEDATA_SERIALIZATION_VERSION` will generate a new set of files.

Many kinds of savedata changes can be handled by the save editor automatically. Some cannot. The save editor is extensible: it supports a system for "user-defined translators" which can be used to tell the save editor how to convert specific pieces of data from one savedata format version to another.


### New dependencies

* **`libgmp3-dev`:** Needed in order to compile GCC plug-ins. A GCC plug-in must be compiled for the specific instance of GCC (i.e. version, host architecture, and target architecture) that you intend to use the plug-in with.

* **`lua5.4`:** Used for post-build scripts. Installable via `sudo apt install lua5.4`.


### Building

Do not run `make` directly. Instead, run `bash build.sh`, passing additional arguments as appropriate.

The `build.sh` script checks for certain needed dependencies, ensures that the custom compiler plug-in builds before the game does, and runs post-build scripts to set data up for the included save file editor. The build script supports the following optional arguments:

* **`--build-name`:** A human-readable name for the current build. The save file editor will display this name as the name of the serialization version being compiled.
  
  If this argument is not specified, then the save editor displays the bare serialization version number to the user. You generally only want to increase the serialization version number when the save file format changes, as the project's post-build scripts will maintain an XML file (a very large one!) for each serialization version (for use by the save editor). This of course means that the serialization version number will diverge from whatever versioning scheme you choose to use for your hack: serialization version 2 may belong to hack version 4.7.1.1. The `--build-name` option allows you to assign a custom name to the save file format, whether that be "4.7.11" or "Public Beta" or some codename.


### Managing save file formats

The `lu_bitpack_save_format.xml` file in the main repo folder contains a machine-readable description of the savedata format generated by the most recent build.

The `usertools/lu-save-js` folder contains a web-based save editor. The `formats` subfolder contains a folder for each serialization version, and a central `index.json` file which lists the versions. This project's post-build scripts copy `lu_bitpack_save_format.xml` into the subfolder for the current serialization version, then generate additional "extra-data" files based on the game's source files, and then update `index.json` to list the generated information for the current serialization version.

The expected flow for developing the game is as follows:

* Make your changes privately, incrementing `SAVEDATA_SERIALIZATION_VERSION` when those changes affect the content of the save file.
* Use the save editor to upgrade your personal playthrough from version to version, so you can test and play your changes without having to restart from Littleroot Town every time those changes touch the save format.
* When you're ready to release a public-facing update,...
  * Reset `SAVEDATA_SERIALIZATION_VERSION` to the last publicly-released value, plus 1.
  * Delete all of the `usertools/lu-save-js/formats` that you generated as part of your testing process (i.e. every folder that comes after a publicly-released serialization version).
  * Hand-edit `index.json` to remove those formats' information. Note that formats start at 0 in this file.
  * Use the save editor to load your save file, specifying a custom XML file (which can be the "official" file for the latest serialization version).
  * Use the save editor to convert your save file to the latest version.
    * Do this even if there have been no changes between the end of your testing and the serialization version number reset. Converting from "version A but as a custom XML file" to "version A" will properly update the version number embedded in your save file.

It's not the prettiest, and I may refine the process later on, but it should work.


### Code changes

* Everything in the `plugins` folder is new.

* `Makefile` has been altered: the command-line parameters used for the compiler now specify the compiler plug-ins to use.

* You are now meant to compile Emerald by running `bash build.sh`. This shell script invokes the makefile for all extant compiler plug-ins, checking and erroring on any missing dependencies (recommending commands to install them), before then invoking the makefile for Emerald and the post-build scripts.

* Source files have been added or edited as necessary to define bitpacking options for savedata.

  * Added
  
    * `include/lu/bitpack_options.h`: Convenience macros for setting bitpacking options as attributes on fields and types.
    
    * `include/lu/bitpack_transform_BoxPokemon.h`<br>`src/lu/bitpack_transform_BoxPokemon.c`: Declares the `SerializedBoxPokemon` type and the functions which convert between it and `BoxPokemon`.
    
    * `include/lu/bitpack_transform_type_BoxPokemon.h`: Defines the `SerializedBoxPokemon` type.
  
    * `include/lu/bitstream.h`<br>`src/lu/bitstream.c`: Defines a type and functions for working with streams of non-byte-aligned data. The generated code will invoke these functions.
    
    * `include/lu/game_typedefs.h`: Defines several `typedef`s which have bitpacking options set on them, e.g. `PokemonLevel` and `MoveID`, so that these options don't have to be set in every individual place where a Pokemon level (and various other common types) may appear.
    
    * `include/save_encryption.h` and `src/save_encryption.c`: Contains functions originally in `src/load_save.c`, so we can access them from within our modified savegame code.
    
    * `src/save-codegen.h`: Included by `save.c` at the appropriate time in order to trigger generation of the bitpacking code.
    
    * `src/save-codegen-options.h`: Included by `save.c` at the appropriate time in order to set options that apply to the overall code generation process, such as which variables to generate bitpacking code for.
  
  * Edited
    
    * `include/global.h`: Edited to set bitpacking options on various fields, including by using the typedefs defined in `include/lu/game_typedefs.h`.
  
    * `include/global.berry.h`: Edited to set bitpacking options on Enigma Berry savedata fields.
  
    * `include/global.tv.h`: Edited to set bitpacking options on various fields, including by using the typedefs defined in `include/lu/game_typedefs.h`.
    
    * `src/load_save.c`: Edited to move `ApplyNewEncryptionKeyToBagItems` to `include/save_encryption.h`.
  
    * `include/pokemon.h`: Edited to set bitpacking options on various fields, including by using the typedefs defined in `include/lu/game_typedefs.h`.
  
    * `include/pokemon_storage_system.h`: Edited to set bitpacking options on various fields, including by using the typedefs defined in `include/lu/game_typedefs.h`.

* `src/save.c` has been rewritten to invoke the generated code.

* `src/save.h` has been altered to remove macros that are no longer meaningful (i.e. macros whose proper values are no longer knowable without invoking code generation). Additionally, a `version` field has been added to the save sector footer.
  
* A `usertools` folder has been added for tools related to the game but not used to build the game.

  * **`lu-save-js`:** A web-based editor for bitpacked saves, using the data format produced when compiling the game.

* New tools have been added to the `tools` folder.
  
  * **`lu-save-js-indexer`:** Post-build scripts written in Lua, which generate important data files for the save editor. These data files allow the save editor to understand things like Pokemon species names without that data being hardcoded into the save editor; it can be generated from the game's source code.
  
  * **`lu-save-report-generator`:** A post-build script written in Lua, which analyzes the XML file produced by the bitpack plug-in in order to produce a human-readable report on how much space has been saved.
  
  * **`lu-lua-lib`:** Lua libraries used by the post-build scripts.
